Chloe Thurston: Good morning.
Chloe Thurston: We'll get started now as people
Chloe Thurston: Come in. So we're talking about parties today and I thought that I would start with a somewhat
Chloe Thurston: Provocative op ed that came out was written by David Brooks, about two years ago, and I think it's a good way to start to introduce the topic and so Brooks argues
Chloe Thurston: Well, I'll read it for you, you know, basically, he sees the end of the two party system coming and this isn't 2018 at the time his sense is that the Republicans who are sort of in charge at the time, in terms of controlling
Chloe Thurston: The Senate and also the Presidency are his concern was that they were sort of trading away some other fiscal principles of low taxes and limited government
Chloe Thurston: For immigration policy that they also felt strongly about. Now again, this is two years ago so
Chloe Thurston: History kind of changed in some ways, but I think the general sentiment of what he's getting at is something that we hear over and over again. And that is the sort of money, quote, right.
Chloe Thurston: Eventually, those who cherish the democratic way of life will realize they have to make a much more radical break than they've ever imagined.
Chloe Thurston: When this realization dawns the realignment against even with all of the structural barriers we could end up with a European style multi party system so
Chloe Thurston: You know it's it's a provocative statement. It's not the first time that I've seen the statement.
Chloe Thurston: Made and there's sort of two components of this. And so one is this idea of party realignment, and so we could think of that even in a two party system like the US has
Chloe Thurston: As sort of meaning that the sort of the composition of the two parties changes so
Chloe Thurston: The Republican Party could consist of a very different set of kind of type set and collection of voters than say 20 years ago as could the Democratic Party or even a new party could emerge and sort of take the place of one of those dominant parties.
Chloe Thurston: But then the other point that Brooks makes and sort of the more controversial one is the idea that even with all of the structural barriers we could end up with a European style multi party system in the US. And so today we're going to talk about the party system.
Chloe Thurston: You know what our parties. Why do we have that. Why does the US have two parties and also, you know, is this system about to break down this Brooks right in any way, he would have mentioned the structural barriers.
Chloe Thurston: And what are those structural barriers, you know, why does Brooks think that those might not matter right now. And what do political scientists have to say about that so
Chloe Thurston: We're just going to get dive right in. So you know what our political parties to start with. I think it's sometimes important just to back up and go right to the basics. So political party.
Chloe Thurston: We define it in political science as a group of candidates and elected officials organized under common label for the purpose of attaining positions of public authority.
Chloe Thurston: And alternative definition of parties actually harkens back to our class on Thursday when we talked about interest groups.
Chloe Thurston: And that alternative definition sees parties as Coalition's groups with intense policy preferences. We call them sort of intense policy commanders people who want something out of politics and want policies.
Chloe Thurston: And so they have a sort of extra incentive to pay attention to politics to put effort into getting their candidates elected.
Chloe Thurston: And they also want to return on investment in sort of their time, effort and money. And so one way to
Chloe Thurston: Get that return or ensure that return on your investment is to exercise some control over either the candidate nominating process. For example, the primary process and over this from the candidates policy positions themselves. So for example, if we think about
Chloe Thurston: public sector unions as being sort of a group with a sort of a, you know, a labor group with intense policy demands that tends to align the Democrat Party, it tends to
Chloe Thurston: to endorse candidates from the Democratic Party and tends to try to not want candidates who would have sort of an anti public sector union.
Chloe Thurston: Position to actually get nominated for for office in the Democratic Party. Likewise, we talked about the NRA last week NRA is considered and National Rifle Association.
Chloe Thurston: You know, it's a non government group. It's an interest group and it's considered much more in line with Republican Party. It has very strong preferences on been policy.
Chloe Thurston: And so it works hard to ensure that candidates that emergent party share those preferences as well.
Chloe Thurston: Now groups don't really exercise full control over this process.
Chloe Thurston: But the point being that there were sort of incentives in the American political system for groups who have intense policy preferences.
Chloe Thurston: To align with party. Yes, and also to try to make sure that the candidates that emerge, are those who also shape or share those policy preferences.
Chloe Thurston: So last thing to mention in terms of defining political parties is much like every other aspect of the political system that we've covered in this set this sort of this third of the class and I talked about intermediaries political parties are not formally a part of the American government
Chloe Thurston: They helped to organize the activities of the government, and also the relationship between elected officials.
Chloe Thurston: Government government institutions and voters, but they are not formally or officially a part of the government. I think it's an important thing to keep in mind.
Chloe Thurston: So what do they do, though, you know, how do they act as an intermediary between, you know,
Chloe Thurston: Within the political system. Well, they mediate between the mass public and government they recruit and train leaders foster political participation. We'll talk about that today.
Chloe Thurston: They allow citizens to hold our elected officials responsible for the government does. And they also help to channel and constraint political conflicts promoting a sort of a resolution.
Chloe Thurston: And they also organize the activities of government they facilitate collective action that's necessary to translate public
Chloe Thurston: Preferences into public policy and so we'll talk about all of these different things, but the very first thing I want to mention because I do this almost every week.
Chloe Thurston: Is what the founders have, you know, have to say about parties and so first of all, you know, given all of these different functions that parties fill in, you know, modern
Chloe Thurston: American politics. The Constitution didn't actually mention parties. Instead, there was this pervasive fear of parties by the framers, and it was reflected, both in historical experience and also widely held 18th century beliefs.
Chloe Thurston: And you can see some of these here to, you know, Ben Franklin says, you know, this month parties are sort of prone governments prone to the infinite mutual abusive parties.
Chloe Thurston: tearing the pieces. The best of characters James Madison who I quote you know all the time.
Chloe Thurston: You know, our views of fashion factions hold intentions that are adverse to the rights of other citizens or to the permanent and aggregate interests of the Community.
Chloe Thurston: And john adams warns that a division of the republican to to have great parties is to be dreaded as the greatest political evil under our Constitution.
Chloe Thurston: And so again, there was this pervasive fear at the time factional conflict brought into mind for bloody religious and political wars of England's past
Chloe Thurston: It also brought into mind the internal strife that had destroyed the republic's in ancient Greece and Rome and later the city states of Renaissance Italy.
Chloe Thurston: And so there was this ideal that the founders sort of wanted the constitution to embody or sort of, you know, work trying to
Chloe Thurston: To promote and that was to view society as a harmonious full cycle at different parts of society still share some common interests.
Chloe Thurston: That all wise and honest authorities would promote
Chloe Thurston: The idea here was that people in authority would view themselves as agents acting on behalf of a whole community and any organized opposition could be viewed as misguided at faster even treasonous at worst. Okay, so this is ridiculous set of assumptions, right, because
Chloe Thurston: You know, when the leaders of the new government took the steps, you know, the parties. First of all, developed almost immediately. And then we persisted throughout US history.
Chloe Thurston: When the leaders of the new government took the steps that led to the creation of the first political parties, they didn't expect or want party competition to become a permanent feature of American politics. They saw this as sort of a temporary expedient and yet they persisted.
Chloe Thurston: So why we can go back to sort of the early election. So the 1792 election wasn't a foregone conclusion or or was a foregone conclusion.
Chloe Thurston: That was not true for years later, it picked the Federalists Adams against the Democratic Republicans Jefferson
Chloe Thurston: And so there were these two people who were very outspoken against parties that also ended up embroiled in a partisan conflict. Almost immediately after the Constitution effect took effect.
Chloe Thurston: And this sort of just persistent throughout time. And so there are a few reasons for this. The first most obvious is the First Amendment right, the First Amendment guarantees freedom to speak right and assemble.
Chloe Thurston: And so it already ensured that all sorts of party activities would be legal. And again, you know,
Chloe Thurston: James Madison. If we go back to federalist 51 points out that you can actually cure faction, you know, you can't prevent the cause of factions to do that would be worse than, than the disease itself.
Chloe Thurston: The First Amendment guarantees all of these rights and to, sort of, you know, prevent political speech or activities from taking place is something that should be avoided at all costs.
Chloe Thurston: In addition, though the Constitution itself created its own incentives for the party parties to fork. And so I want to talk about this for the next few slides. Okay, so the logic of party formation.
Chloe Thurston: So first, the US Constitution actually makes it quite valuable to build majority Coalition's across institutions in order to succeed. If you think about sort of talked about this earlier in the class.
Chloe Thurston: What you actually need in order to pass legislation in in Congress right you need
Chloe Thurston: A majority of the House in the Senate, and then you also need the support of the President. Maybe the court, the less directly
Chloe Thurston: And so you need some sort of common course of action and alliances across institutions and those Coalition's again will probably be diverse reflecting sort of the diversity of interests and concerns across you and very large geographically and also population wise Republic.
Chloe Thurston: In addition to that, in order to succeed, you need to be able to build a stable electoral alliance. And so this was one of the, sort of, you know, core logics a party formation in the early republic.
Chloe Thurston: Early on parley parties realized that they could get more accomplished in Congress, if they could keep their own people in office. And so, this meant recruiting people to run under a parties particular a particular parties banner.
Chloe Thurston: And it's also certainly incentivized electoral alliances early on across the states. So the states would also sort of form, you know, under the same party banner across states.
Chloe Thurston: Third parties also need to mobilize voters to win elections. So I want to talk about. Okay, here we go. Oops.
Chloe Thurston: Stable electoral Hawaiian. So as I mentioned, parties realize that get more accomplished in Congress, if they can keep their people in office. I want to give you one example of what happens when you don't have a stable electoral alliance. Does anyone recognize that person on the right.
Chloe Thurston: We
Lee Ajisafe: Is that Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Chloe Thurston: That is, and what is Arnold Schwarzenegger known for
Chloe Thurston: We
Lee Ajisafe: An actor, but it wasn't also governor of California.
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, he was also the governor of California. And so it's a kind of an interesting story how he ended up
Chloe Thurston: Being governor. So he was an actor who is famous bodybuilder, miss. Mr. Universe, which is very good, you know, political experience if you're going to be a governor to first be Mr. Universe. He's actually not that Governor
Chloe Thurston: And he was the governor when I was living in California and actually signed to my diploma. Not literally, but then Governor signatures on your deployment. So it's good reason to save it.
Chloe Thurston: Um, but it's a kind of an interesting story how he wind up being governor and also sort of how this relates to some of the themes for today.
Chloe Thurston: And so shorts maker became governor through a sort of funny process in 2003 when Governor grade Davis ended up being the target of a recall campaign by folders.
Chloe Thurston: This recall is a procedure that's available in some states that allows voters to come together and vote and elected official out of office before their term is up.
Chloe Thurston: You know, for some reason, they have to organize to do this. And so this was led by a number of prominent republicans at a time, and also found favor with voters. This was in the wake of an electricity prices in California electricity bills were skyrocketing for sort of ordinary people.
Chloe Thurston: And Gray Davis, the governor at the time was also suspected of corruption and so this recall campaign goes through Davis is ultimately recalled
Chloe Thurston: But what happens next is you still need a governor right so 135 candidates RAM to replace Gray Davis and because of the nature of the special election. There were no party primaries.
Chloe Thurston: So all you needed to do in order to make it on the ballot was like 65 signatures and pay a 30 $500 fee and so candidates from recognized you know from any
Chloe Thurston: And so this is how you end up with 135 candidates running. This is what the ballot looks like it's pretty wild.
Chloe Thurston: And so the issue that was you know there were part of labels on the ballot and you can see them here, right, if you look. Sorry. It's kind of a small ballot, but they're the type small but if you look very closely.
Chloe Thurston: You can see that are there are labels right there are Republicans or Democrats that are also independence, but can anyone guess or sort of, you know, suggest why it might be difficult to coordinate around a particular candidate with this many people on the ballot.
Chloe Thurston: Andrew
Andrew Neville: Just because like I know I'm in Georgia. Now, and you have the current special election for this senate seat and it's similar because like in the Democratic Party is sort of coalesced around Warnock
Andrew Neville: The Republican Party is bitterly divided between lovelorn Collins, even though they're both
Andrew Neville: Relative and they're slightly different ideological views, but they're very similar Republicans. There's engaged in like a fear to battle with one another and like without a primary
Andrew Neville: It's like hard just to like because generally people in the same party like are going to be relatively similar any off ideologically so it just tough to really differentiate between
Chloe Thurston: Candidates. So Andrew Me ask you if you were a Republican Party strategist in the state of Georgia. What would you suggest to the two candidates to Leffler and what's the name of the other person. I just forgot
Andrew Neville: Some columns.
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, Colin well
Chloe Thurston: Yeah. Oh, Andrew. Yeah.
Andrew Neville: I'm here. Are you just cut out on your, your question. Oh,
Chloe Thurston: Sorry, I was asking. Sorry about that. Um, oh no.
Chloe Thurston: I have an unstable connection, what would be, can you hear me now.
Andrew Neville: Yes, I can.
Chloe Thurston: What would be your advice to LA Fleur and Collins, if you were a Republican strategist in Georgia right now.
Andrew Neville: I mean I think regardless. One of them is going to win and move on to a runoff. So I think it's it. I honestly think with the current strategy of the election. And the way it works, that they need to focus on beating the other one.
Andrew Neville: More than before. Knock at this point. I think they're both doing that.
Andrew Neville: But that's not necessarily a good national strategy.
Chloe Thurston: Okay, yeah. Um, so another funny Georgia story is there there's. So there's this possibility of a split float right which it because of the vote could split it will get sent to a runoff, because no one's going to get a majority.
Chloe Thurston: If you want to avoid a runoff, you could maybe ask one of those two candidates to peel off to hang back right
Chloe Thurston: Or, you know, on the Democratic side, there was some concern.
Chloe Thurston: That there, there were a bunch of democratic candidates running to and they all seem to be splitting the vote between themselves and so there was concerned within the party there that if they continue to split the vote between themselves.
Chloe Thurston: Then, none of them would end up on the ballot on the runoff ballot. So you can see there's a sort of coordination roll a funny aside, is that one of the democrats who was running in Georgia. I think it's still running used to be my English teacher in high school.
Chloe Thurston: But, so, you know, but there's you can see there's like a coordination role if you want
Chloe Thurston: If you have sort of like policy preferences and a bunch of people who kind of share those you might still want to coordinate around one in order to try to get a majority of the vote, or at least you know
Chloe Thurston: A plurality. If that's the elective if those are the rules in that particular election that area and in Georgia. They need a majority. So it changes the incentives.
Chloe Thurston: And so this is what happens though again in California. It was 135 different people on the ballots and if all you know again of Democrats, Republicans, independents, it becomes really hard to coalesce around one certain one specific member of each of these parties.
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, thanks. Um, it becomes difficult to, you know, coordinate around one member of
Chloe Thurston: The party to get behind. And you can end up with kind of surprising outcomes. And so the surprising outcome here was that Arnold Schwarzenegger won the election.
Chloe Thurston: was arguably based on name recognition since voters didn't have a whole lot else to go on. But as I mentioned, we actually you know bit fine in office.
Chloe Thurston: But, you know, as a surprising outcome and one that would probably be very different if parties had exercised stronger oversight in the beginning, right, if they had been able to exercise a stronger mechanism of selecting and coordinating
Chloe Thurston: Then it's unlikely that Schwarzenegger would have been picked probably someone who had sort of a stronger relationship with the Republican Party would have been would have been selected as sort of the candidate. So the logic of party formation. Let's keep going. Okay. So third
Chloe Thurston: You know, there's the constitution of course also
Chloe Thurston: Has incentives to mobilize voters to win elections. Right. And so once you've recruited candidates.
Chloe Thurston: You need to get them elected by mobilized voters and you know this hat helps if you have an organization. If you have a network of leaders and activists assembled to mobilize electoral support.
Chloe Thurston: It's much easier to do it right and so initially this didn't require a very big organization since the vast majority of citizens couldn't vote.
Chloe Thurston: But by the 1800s, and especially by the 1830s voting rights and expanded to pretty much all white males. And so, this meant that you actually needed to figure out some sort of infrastructure to mobilize mass electorate.
Chloe Thurston: And so this is where you get to sort of another function enroll of parties and one that persists today as well. And so you can see this here. This is George seeping them.
Chloe Thurston: Who is an American artist painting in the mid 1900s. And this is from a series of three paintings in his elections here is, and this is a voting process in Missouri. You can see here there are men waiting on the stairs to vote. Two young boys are playing
Chloe Thurston: Other people are talking It's Like a real party right when you talk about parties. Here's, here's a party going on and sort of as people are are voting.
Chloe Thurston: And you can think about, sort of, you know, the role that 30s and then sort of a pretty infrastructure would play and getting people to actually turn out and do this sort of thing so
Chloe Thurston: In addition, parties in the context of mass politics can solve a few different free rider problems. And so again, if we think about sort of the, the California example.
Chloe Thurston: But we'll do a new one this time. But, so, you know, imagine with our 10 candidates running for office in your state.
Chloe Thurston: And they're all running for different offices and yet they appeal to roughly the same class of voters.
Chloe Thurston: So if one of those people works hard to mobilize voters that helps that person.
Chloe Thurston: And it also helps the other nine vote, people who are running for other offices and so each candidate in that sense has a temptation to free ride right because it's expensive in terms of time and resources to to run for office to, you know, advertise to campaign.
Chloe Thurston: And so each candidate has a temptation to free ride on the collective good of mobilization and so parties can solve this by compelling each candidate to coordinate instead
Chloe Thurston: Finally, voters also use party labels that can be useful for voters to sort of if, to the extent that they accurately convey, but the candidate will do an office.
Chloe Thurston: It can make voting much easier. And it can sort of also enable voters to show their displeasure of people in office, and we'll talk about this later, too. But there's the sort of
Chloe Thurston: Belief and well founded depending on sort of whether certain assumptions are met that party label can also help to hold governments more accountable politicians more accountable because politicians have an incentive and maintaining the brand.
Chloe Thurston: Okay, so this is one one sort of other aspect I want to talk about that's important is, sort of, again, I mentioned that parties are not sort of, you know, officially part of the government.
Chloe Thurston: But they still have sort of three mean spheres of activities in government. And I think the first one is actually a little bit confusing, so I should spend a bit bit of time in it.
Chloe Thurston: On it, but the first is parties and government. And so when we talk about parties, sort of, you know, one thing that political scientists mean and journalist and others.
Chloe Thurston: Members of the party themselves as well are sort of that parties operate within the government to organize governmental action, especially in legislators are Parliament's they influence how people in public cooperate with one another to form teams and achieve policy goals.
Chloe Thurston: And in every mature democracy in the world, including the US national governments are run in some sense by political parties even parties are not officially part of the government.
Chloe Thurston: Leaders of the government are also tend to be considered leaders of the party and they use the machinery of their parties to organize the activities of the government, for example, to draft and pass legislation.
Chloe Thurston: To place top bureaucrats and executive agencies and to formulate broad policy goals. So this is both an important role parties and also a reason why they're important to study.
Chloe Thurston: In addition, parties, we sort of discussed the parties are also described and discussed
Chloe Thurston: With respect to their relationship to the electorate. Right. And so again, parties organized voters thinking by providing sort of intellectual categories that they can use to associate individual candidates.
Chloe Thurston: Or politicians with specific values and beliefs. These can also engender loyalty in the voting booth and party labels. As I mentioned before, can make it easier for citizens.
Chloe Thurston: Who share common beliefs and interests to coordinate their own actions during elections, including in terms of voting donating time and money towards a unified goal and can also help voters to, sort of, you know, hold their own parties or hold other parties accountable as well.
Chloe Thurston: One sort of aside, it's sort of thinking about like the tower of parties and the electorate and sort of a psychological power of parties is that most voters say that they best vote for the best candidate.
Chloe Thurston: But about 90% of voters vote with their parties come election day. So you can think about this sort of the pool that that parties insert on the public
Chloe Thurston: Finally, when we talk about parties sort of third distinct yet connected role is their capacity as organizations. And as I mentioned, sort of,
Chloe Thurston: Parties helped organize the efforts of candidates politicians and voters in order to win elections, they can, though not in the case of California.
Chloe Thurston: Choose candidates to be on election ballot. That's what the nomination processes that can help their candidates raise money run campaigns and turnout votes.
Chloe Thurston: And they can also engaged and fundraising and different types of campaign and electoral activity electron activities like direct mailing
Chloe Thurston: So these functions reinforce each other. And interestingly enough, oh, we're gonna take a quick break. That's right. But anyhow, these functions sort of reinforce each other. So we're going to take a break, I
Chloe Thurston: Thought I would do some break music because I'm talking about parties reminds me of what I would consider a sort of both a high and low point.
Chloe Thurston: Of American political parties and that's the DNC Macarena from 1994. So we're going to take about a five minute break and for
Chloe Thurston: Fun. I'll put that on. But then when we come back, we're going to talk about features of the American Party System.
Chloe Thurston: Why there's a two party system in the last what the sort of you know what the incentives are for that to emerge and maintain itself.
Chloe Thurston: And then some of the challenges of polarization and this is one of the issues that came up most frequently in your surveys, at the beginning of the class. So here we go.
And it is time for the mix and this morning. We're looking back 20 years to, you know, we're just gonna be intervention season, but the club.
Hillary Clinton.
To me, that does not reflect from her abilities to leave this country, I must add
Fabulous.
People are going for it. Yeah, very wisely, I think, what can you do it.
I mean, I was, of course, to your
Magical
Chloe Thurston: Okay. Can people see the screen now.
Chloe Thurston: Okay. Great. Thanks. Okay. Um, so
Chloe Thurston: That was just a diversion. It's not worth ending it or sort of slowing everything down to get back to that. I'll share the link with you if you're interested in in it. I'm going to share a few other links to
Chloe Thurston: Because I am wondering if my internet connection is creating problems for sharing videos. So hold on, you just
Share for a second.
Chloe Thurston: So I'm going to keep going. I've got a backup. Now I'll text you the link for the live a few videos for today.
Chloe Thurston: If they don't work. I will text you the link. So thank you for telling me that they weren't working. I think there might just be a problem today.
Chloe Thurston: Okay. So I want to talk, like I mentioned, to reiterate, I'm parties emerged, not because anyone thought they were a good idea.
Chloe Thurston: But because of the institutional structure and policies that were established by the Constitution just made them to useful to forget.
Chloe Thurston: Again, they had an obvious value on a number of dimensions to elected elite leaders who are competing for various political goods and for, you know, political office.
Chloe Thurston: To voters and sort of cognitive shortcuts for voting decisions and two candidates as well.
Chloe Thurston: And so all of this guaranteed that parties practical virtues would be rediscovered by every political generation. And again, and something to sort of point out the features of the of the American Party System.
Chloe Thurston: Again, have those features have been pretty constant throughout American history. Again, these sort of
Chloe Thurston: These roles that they play whoops in organizing to create stable legislative alliances.
Chloe Thurston: To build electorial alliances. We think that parties and elections and as organizations and also to mobilize voters to serve as a party label to sort of help voters.
Chloe Thurston: Who as we've mentioned last week and the week before you don't have lots of cognitive limitations when it comes to paying attention to politics and sort of understanding
Chloe Thurston: You know what they're voting for this is a shortcut feathers take and so you know those features have persisted throughout the American Party System.
Chloe Thurston: At the same time, political scientists and historians and anyone really paying attention to recognize that the party system itself, you know, in terms of who it's comprised of what parties. It's comprised of and what issues the electorate. It organizes itself around the varied over time.
Chloe Thurston: And so
Chloe Thurston: I'll sort of this right here just sort of shows you know one sort of way of thinking about different kinds of party systems, political scientists think there, then maybe six maybe we're in a seventh party system.
Chloe Thurston: Over time, it's become an argument that's not really worth winning. I think the more important point is just that party systems change. Right. So the Federalists were important in 1788
Chloe Thurston: You know, we don't have Federalists anymore.
Chloe Thurston: By the 1930s, we've sort of had a new deal coalition and they're the American politics was basically organized around one of two issues do you support the New Deal or do you not and this persisted until about the 1960s and since the 1960s, there's been a new realignment that's been
Chloe Thurston: Shaped by a lot of different issues, but one of the core ones is whether or not one supports a very strong government role in protecting civil rights or promoting civil rights versus
Chloe Thurston: Either less of a role or some sort of a more hands off road in those issues. And I mentioned this.
Chloe Thurston: A few weeks ago and talking about the Great Migration and changes in party platforms in northern cities to embrace civil rights and how that also
Chloe Thurston: Changed the sort of the character of the party Coalition's in the United States.
Chloe Thurston: So again, sort of, you know, what are these features that keep reappearing and every system, you know, even as the dominant parties and the issues that they organize themselves around change. And the first is sort of their composition
Chloe Thurston: Parties are decentralized and fragmented.
Chloe Thurston: And so again you know historically national parties assembled from diverse state and local political factions and they were concerned chiefly with the politics in their own areas or sort of their local politics.
Chloe Thurston: And this decentralized policymaking system allowed this local parties to work together to elect national leaders, but it also allowed them to go their own way on matters closer to home.
Chloe Thurston: national leaders in the meantime could make him diverse and unwieldy Coalition's because many of the factions within them had little contact with one another, except for choosing the party's candidate so
Chloe Thurston: You can even see this today. Let's see if we can get this to work. I really hope it works.
Chloe Thurston: Today, but there's this idea that, you know, sometimes members of Congress even want to distance themselves from the National Party in order to gain acceptance.
Chloe Thurston: From their local, you know, one in order to represent sort of their local constituencies, but also because the national label might send sort of
Chloe Thurston: Signals that would go against the values of their local constituencies and so I'm sticking with I'm going to see if we can do this one first. Again, please send me a message if it doesn't show up, but I think this is an interesting set of
Chloe Thurston: Of examples of sort of members of Congress working to distance themselves from the party. So let's just try this for a second. Okay.
Chloe Thurston: Seems muted.
One more time.
Chloe Thurston: Okay, tell me he can't hear that
I'm Travis jewelry. This campaign has been one for the books. My family has heard the lies and attacks. Linking me to politicians, I don't know. And I've never even met
But keep this in mind. I've never raised taxes. Greg Davis has. I don't have a taxpayer funded car Greg Davis does I'm pro life and pro gun.
I'm Travis Childers I approve this message. Because I'll do in Congress, what I've done in Mississippi work with both parties balance budgets and create jobs.
Chloe Thurston: Okay, I'm going to show one more. This is for the same race.
Chloe Thurston: But a different
Chloe Thurston: Writers children's claim. He's a conservative
Children's contributed money to john kerry endorsed by Barack Obama.
Liberal voting record in the US Senate and to try this children's ever get elected and the pupil to keep a liberal house speaker from San Francisco Nancy Pelosi and power.
That may be grew up in California, but here in Mississippi that dog walk on the National Republican congressional committee is responsible for the content of
Chloe Thurston: Okay, there we go. So we're gonna do a new share. Okay.
Chloe Thurston: Okay, so what stuck out. Can everyone see the slides just do a thumbs up. Okay. Um, what stuck out to people about those videos.
Chloe Thurston: Can anyone figure out where travel travel Travis childless was running
Chloe Thurston: Sam.
Sam Keimweiss: Yeah, he was appeared to be running on the Democratic ticket, but at the same time trying to embrace some of the republican values.
Sam Keimweiss: I'm in New York City. And we're actually seeing this a lot with the candidates on Long Island and Staten and Staten Island max rose is really running towards the center. But the attack right ads against him.
Sam Keimweiss: Calling the same he's defending the police and he's responding. No, I'm not defending the police I'm adding funding for the police officers, the same kind of thing.
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, exactly. So, and, you know, if you notice
Chloe Thurston: He doesn't mention his party right
Chloe Thurston: In the advertisement. So, and what what seems to be and but yes he's he's clearly a Democrat, although he's sort of touting some of his policy positions that tend not to be traditionally associated with Democrats.
Chloe Thurston: Now, what seems to be the, you know, in the second video that what seems to be the strategy there what's happening there.
Chloe Thurston: Mm.
Emma Rosenbaum: Well, it seems like the Republican Party is kind of like appealing to you know all the people part of party like all the voters.
Emma Rosenbaum: To come mobilize people against him.
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, Anna.
Anna Lansford: And I think they're also mentioning some slightly more polarizing features in the Democratic Party who have endorsed him to kind of show that even if he's saying that he's more moderate he's supported by a lot of more liberal politicians. Exactly.
Chloe Thurston: Yeah. So what they're doing is they're sort of
Chloe Thurston: One, you know, reminding voters that though Tyler's you know has sort of pitched himself as someone who represents the values of this community and also again positions that often are associated with Republicans. He's actually not one of them.
Chloe Thurston: And that, you know, by voting for him, they would also be voting for Groovy Nancy Pelosi and so this is, you know, a more POLARIZING FIGURE.
Chloe Thurston: And this is from 2008 and I you know I don't think that policy has become any less polarizing in that that sets since then.
Chloe Thurston: But again, you can sort of see one. You know how members of Congress distance themselves from the party when it's advantageous in particular.
Chloe Thurston: When trying to sort of appeal to a local electorate that doesn't necessarily have the same politics as the national you know party leaders.
Chloe Thurston: But also how that can also be used as a tool for mobilizing voters and you know the label again can be used as a this is exactly what the, the second ad does is it tries to sort of
Chloe Thurston: provide that information to voters that was not provided in the first ad and also a link strategically that candidate to sort of the broader, you know, the bigger party and party leadership.
Chloe Thurston: So Coalition's you know are, again, you know, parties are
Chloe Thurston: Rooted in federalism, they can
Chloe Thurston: Distance themselves, you know, they there.
Chloe Thurston: They can form their own local reputations local and State parties, but it still kind of, you know, they have the ability to distance themselves from a national party somewhat, but there are still a lot of limits to that.
Chloe Thurston: The other thing to point out about parties. And again, this is something that has persisted throughout
Chloe Thurston: American history is that they represent pretty diverse Coalition's and we'll come back to this again. Also, when we talk about sort of you know why there are only two parties in the US.
Chloe Thurston: But you know there is sort of decentralization of parties is
Chloe Thurston: Not just about region and federalism in that sense, but also about the diversity of the coalition's within that hold parties together. And since the beginning.
Chloe Thurston: The major parties have been diverse and then we'll the coalition's they can buy a part of any time.
Chloe Thurston: If they're not carefully maintained and you can see some of those Coalition's even maybe coming apart right now in recent years and, you know, we'll see what happens in the future.
Chloe Thurston: But it requires sort of a skillful management of all of the differences within different factions and across different factions within a party. And so I think the best example of this.
Chloe Thurston: Diversity of party Coalition's is the New Deal coalition and the New Deal coalition. Again, this is, you know, starts with the election of Franklin Roosevelt in 1932
Chloe Thurston: Brought together democrats and every conceivable background United White southern segregationists with Northern African Americans, since you know very few southern African Americans to vote.
Chloe Thurston: That also United Progressive intellectuals with machine politicians, even though. Again, you can think of their values spinning on substantially at odds with each other, progressives were sort of into
Chloe Thurston: Sort of transparency of government machines. We're not into that.
Chloe Thurston: They also united union members and farmers Roman Catholics and Southern Baptists. This is a really diverse coalition
Chloe Thurston: And they really only agreed on one thing and that was electing Democrats to office and they have very different reasons for wanting to do that. Some were attracted to Roosevelt New Deal social policies which were radical expansion of the federal government into social economic welfare.
Chloe Thurston: Others, you know, again, progressive intellectuals like the idea of the government taking responsibility for the economic well being of cities.
Chloe Thurston: Other members were members of the coalition by condition so conservative Southern whites were still expressing political identities that had been forged in the Civil War. If you recall the role of the Republican Party was up to oppose
Chloe Thurston: The continuation of slavery Roman Catholics were already disproportionately democratic in part because of anti Catholic nativism. That was the legacy a legacy of
Chloe Thurston: The at the time the sort of the heritage of the Republican Party at the time and the sort of the, no nothing heritage and so as a movement.
Chloe Thurston: So as a movement, you know, this is like a really diverse coalition. There's no real reason that they all have to hang together and they don't it eventually falls apart.
Chloe Thurston: But, you know, during the New Deal what kept that coalition together. It was basically one issue, you know, do you support or oppose the new feel and within that there is a bit of wheeling and dealing
Chloe Thurston: But one of the things that happens is that as sort of new issues become the focus of electoral politics, again, a sort of civil rights.
Chloe Thurston: Becomes, you know, the focus of electoral politics as it enters into party platforms, sort of, especially northern democratic platforms.
Chloe Thurston: It starts to change and unravel that coalition. And so again, so this is how you see sort of diverse Coalition's do not necessarily have to hang together by definition.
Chloe Thurston: requires substantial work by parties to keep those different factions together and they don't necessarily, you know, always stay hanging together. Other events strategic changes. What have you can sort of move those Coalition's and two different sorts of organizations. Okay, so in addition
Chloe Thurston: So, you know, I talked about the composition in terms of the decentralization and fragmentation of party Coalition's to another key feature or professional politicians and the sort of idea of politicians.
Chloe Thurston: You know, are in parties today sort of be a full time professionals tend to manage parties and activists who volunteer their time. But the idea being that sort of
Chloe Thurston: The frequency of elections gives incentives for politicians to professionalize interview tonight, their activities in order to sort of
Chloe Thurston: Maintain some stability to sort of maintain competitiveness of their own party.
Chloe Thurston: And also, you know, to try to compete with with the other party as well. Okay, I'm gonna go really quickly. Okay, competition and I think this is the most important thing. And the one that comes up the most often
Chloe Thurston: In terms of things that people dislike about the political system in the US and that's competition between two major parties.
Chloe Thurston: I'm not gonna maybe I'll show it. Um, but, so again, sort of feature that has been pretty much consistent throughout his competition between two major parties.
Chloe Thurston: Made up of decentralized fragmented Pirate Party Coalition's maintained by professional politicians.
Chloe Thurston: And say a bit more about to party competition during the first few Congress's national leaders gradually divided into two major camps.
Chloe Thurston: And so they initiated that pattern of to party competition that has continued with a few temporary exceptions to this day. Americans tend to think of the two party system as normal, but you know it's really the exception.
Chloe Thurston: Most modern democracies have I will show more than two parties and it's pretty remarkable in some ways that you know a nation that so divided continually by
Chloe Thurston: Region by religion by race and ethnicity, not to mention social beliefs and economic interests can fit into as many you know as few as to political campaigns. And so you can see here, and this is this is a somewhat data.
Chloe Thurston: Figure, this is from 2004 so it's like I said not up to date, but sort of, you know, the US is pretty distinctive and having so few political parties.
Chloe Thurston: And so, to go back to the sort of the combination of two political parties and also the fact that parties themselves are, you know, made up of pretty diverse Coalition's here.
Chloe Thurston: Here's actually first you know one person who recognize this pretty recently was Alexandria Ocasio Cortez
Chloe Thurston: Who you know said in any other country. She and Joe Biden wouldn't be in the same party. And again, you know, she's probably right.
Chloe Thurston: She's definitely to the left of Joe Biden and yeah you know in the US that the coalition has formed so that the two of them, you know, share sure party coalition, even though they have pretty different beliefs and values.
Chloe Thurston: Lead Rotman I assigned him for today, although I didn't assign this particular article is someone who has been thinking about these issues for a very long time and I think he's really I
Chloe Thurston: I really like his. He thinks a lot about sort of political reform and like what kinds of reform my address some of the things that really bother people. What kinds of reformer work both from the constitutional standpoint in that, you know, they could be
Chloe Thurston: Implemented through acts of Congress or state activity rather than, you know, having to
Chloe Thurston: amend the Constitution, which is a much more difficult process. And in doing so, you know, he's given a lot of thought to the party system and
Chloe Thurston: Sort of the fact of two parties, you know, a stable two party system.
Chloe Thurston: Who, who is represented in that. What sort of interests don't necessarily get represented in that system and could it change because the us move to more parliamentary system. He argues that it can. I'm not going to say too much about that today.
Chloe Thurston: But he sort of is a strong proponent of either Congress or states, creating large legislative districts and those districts. So instead of
Chloe Thurston: Electing sort of one member of Congress in your district, you move to, sort of, you know, you take the five districts, you become one district and if
Chloe Thurston: Whatever party you assign votes by sort of the percentage or US assign representation by the percentage of votes that are that are received.
Chloe Thurston: So one of the things though that that drop meant shows here though, which I think is interesting. It's not something that's widely, you know, it's an interesting point. I think it's worth thinking about. Because of the point that
Chloe Thurston: Coalition's you know parties are very diverse Coalition's but I'll say, I don't think this is something that like is
Chloe Thurston: uncontroversial show among political scientists, but I think it's a good example, sort of, one way to break apart, sort of the diversity of Coalition's today. And so one of the things that he does, he looks at sort of different values.
Chloe Thurston: That American seems to have to defer on that don't necessarily have to be represented by the way that the party system, you know, represents them today. So, you know,
Chloe Thurston: Do you think that free market capitalism does more good than harm. Do you think universal social welfare programs should span. Should the US guaranteed the post World War Two global order.
Chloe Thurston: What about you know what from cosmic what role should cosmopolitan values play in politics. What about traditional religious
Chloe Thurston: Values. And what about civil liberties and their production. And so one of the things he points out is that, you know, if you look across all of these different
Chloe Thurston: Indicators, there are a lot of different you know factions within American politics. They don't necessarily need to be represented only by the Democratic and Republican Party, you can easily have a third party theoretically not not
Chloe Thurston: That you know represent some of these factions, you could actually end up with six parties, but the American system does not
Chloe Thurston: Incentivize them so. So again, you know, given all of these different ways that people can break up break down their political values and interests and concerns.
Chloe Thurston: And that support for third party is at a 20 year. Hi, this is from the drop man piece assigned for today. You know, why doesn't the US have third parties. Does anyone want to kick off that discussion.
Chloe Thurston: Alley.
Ally Milas: Yeah, I was gonna say that it's majority rules system. So whoever gets the most votes wins over with more parties, that's more difficult.
Chloe Thurston: Uh huh. Yeah. So part of this has to do with the fact that, you know, you just need a plurality like you just need to
Chloe Thurston: Get the most votes to win. You don't need to get an actual majority which might lead to a coalition she do, what do you want to say.
Jiyoon Yang: I was also going to talk about the majority takes all voting system.
Chloe Thurston: Okay, so good, everyone has the same answer, or at least two of you. And I think that's terrific. So, you know, again, if the voting system is a big reason for why the US has two parties.
Chloe Thurston: We refer to this as sort of related to diverge as law, which is the number of effective political parties depends on the incentives within the electoral system. Okay. That's big. So I'll say a little bit more
Chloe Thurston: The US electoral system is defined by two features. The first is what we call first past the post rules, the person who gets the most votes so you know plurality not exactly majority, even if they don't get a majority wins.
Chloe Thurston: The second feature is that the US has single member districts only there's only one winning candidate per district per election and so differently as law.
Chloe Thurston: Suggests that a result of this is that only two parties can never really be electorally competitive in a for a sustained period of time and so
Chloe Thurston: I'll just show show why here. Okay, so you can sort of think that more closely about why this works. Okay, so, you know,
Chloe Thurston: Why does the first past the post system in which whoever gets the most votes, even if not the majority, you know, why is that relevant
Chloe Thurston: And so we can think about an alternative system here in which each district still gets only one representative, but in which the majority of votes is required Tobin
Chloe Thurston: And so in this case more than two parties could be sustained if voting occurred in multiple rounds. So here we're in round one.
Chloe Thurston: So in the first round Fodor's would vote for whoever they want among a number of candidates. Right. So your three candidates right here.
Chloe Thurston: Candidate to gets 40% candidate. He gets 32% and candidate be gets 28% and what you see up here is sort of like we're putting their sort of preferences along single dimension, you can sort of make up, you know, maybe like
Chloe Thurston: Zero is like like very redistributive party and the 10 is, you know, very low government like redistribution or taxation. Um, OK. So again, we have three parties.
Chloe Thurston: Will originally named them A, B and C. And they're pretty similar to each other at least amb are pretty similar to each other and they have similar positions.
Chloe Thurston: And they appeal to similar types of voters, but they have some slight differences that separate their voters, which is why a is number two and number three. They're not sort of you know what the exact same space.
Chloe Thurston: Okay. So, in the first round of voting parties. A and B fight a close battle, he gets 32% of the vote be gets 28% together. They've gotten 60% of the vote.
Chloe Thurston: Which is a majority right and party. See, on the other hand doesn't really have competition from a similar party. And so ends up with 40% of the vote. Okay, so now
Chloe Thurston: But you know we're in a majority system right so party B's candidate is now eliminated.
Chloe Thurston: Because they weren't in the top two and so they don't advance to the second round. And so now we have a second round, and this is between the selection is just between a NC
Chloe Thurston: And so even though see got the most votes in round one. Now they lose in round two. And he gets all of the votes from the supporters of be because be is closer to a than that to see right
Chloe Thurston: So the point here is that A, B, and C are all viable parties or candidates, the supporters of a&b who had very similar views and both strongly opposed see
Chloe Thurston: You know, don't really get harmed by voters by having voted their true preferences. Instead, they get to vote a second time.
Chloe Thurston: And they ultimately end up with a candidate that's reasonably close to their preferences. Okay, how does this play out in the US, though. Well, so again if both A and B ran
Chloe Thurston: Should be two or three are there, see what when despite the fact that a and b are pretty similar. And if they joined forces, you know, would actually be able to see again the math is pretty much the same here.
Chloe Thurston: So what happens though is because of the system, it makes much more sense for a and b to just form their own party right
Chloe Thurston: If they're smart about it, they'll form their own party and they'll win against see. And so this is why a two party system results from first past the post or plurality voting.
Chloe Thurston: Because there's just always more of an incentive for
Chloe Thurston: Parties that are, you know, close to each other to form a coalition to get more votes than there is for them to all run independently and then risk losing to, you know, the party that's farther from those other values.
Chloe Thurston: Okay, so that's sort of the logic, but the the you know the part this patterns continued for a few different reasons.
Chloe Thurston: You know, so first you know is that again voters are strategic so if their favorite candidate doesn't have a chance they'll probably turn to the less objectionable major party candidates who does have a chance
Chloe Thurston: Because you know as that example shows candidates are also strategic, they tend to join one of the two competitive parties, rather than pursuing offices independence or third party nominees. And then there are very important reinforcing effects and so
Chloe Thurston: States, for example.
Chloe Thurston: I just lost my page so states, for example, are certain major, major parties like within states erect barriers to getting to other parties getting on the ballot.
Chloe Thurston: So that helps to sort of reinforce this tendency towards two parties in the US.
Chloe Thurston: And again, and you know, as this example shows if there's a third party and it's, you know, has some popular aspects of its platform, then it makes much more sense for
Chloe Thurston: You know, the more viable. The major parties to just try to copy, copy those aspects of the third party incorporate all of their voters. Again, it's sort of big strategic sense from the candidates perspective.
Chloe Thurston: In the sense that they're trying to you know get the most votes so um so you know it's a you could think of an alternative system. You know how this might look under proportional representation
Chloe Thurston: Under proportional representation each party gets number of seats in the legislature that
Chloe Thurston: Corresponds to the proportion of votes that they get in the election. And so you can see, you know, Illinois, based on its population has 18 seats in the House rep.
Chloe Thurston: And the House of Representatives. And so if we had the same distribution of votes across parties, A, B, and C party. A would get approximately 32% of those seats, which is about six
Chloe Thurston: Party be would get 28% of that five seats and party. See, we get seven seats. This is going back to the old version of this right
Chloe Thurston: And so you can see that like you could end up with a very different kind of setup, depending on how voting works in terms of, you know, do you need a majority in order to win.
Chloe Thurston: And also in terms of how districts work. Is there one member per district or can you have multiple members in a district, in which case you could also assign
Chloe Thurston: Representation within proportion to, you know, the vote that's received for each party or candidate.
Chloe Thurston: And as I mentioned, I didn't assign this particular reading. But if you're interested lead Rotman also has like he's a big proponent of trying to do this at the state level like having large multi member districts
Chloe Thurston: So that there could be an opportunity for third party candidates to be more viable. It's kind of controversial. I'm not sure I buy it.
Chloe Thurston: But it's a really interesting idea. And again, you know, it's trying to get at something that really bothers most Americans. And so I think it's you know it's worth thinking about how to make the political system more representative of, again, you know, a really
Chloe Thurston: diverse set of values and possible cleavages and Coalition's. Okay. So I want to talk briefly about sort of
Chloe Thurston: You know, sort of modern features of the American political parties and sort of just to think about them briefly so
Chloe Thurston: You know you've heard about the term polarization. Many of you wrote in the survey beginning of the class and you know about sort of like why what why are pretty so polarized, are they
Chloe Thurston: And so I wanted to talk a little bit about polarization and some of us have arguments surrounding it. And also some of the evidence about polarization. So something that was actually pretty controversial even a decade ago.
Chloe Thurston: It was hard to measure. So
Chloe Thurston: The American Party System now though consists of two major political parties Democrats and Republicans
Chloe Thurston: And one of the things that's very interesting about them is the extent to which they are sorted fight clearly now along ideological lines.
Chloe Thurston: The most liberal Republican member of Congress has a voting record that's consistently to the right of the most conservative democrat and you can see that if you look, the bottom of the screen. The bottom right hand and the bottom left hand.
Chloe Thurston: You can see that there's, you know, especially on the right. There's like no
Chloe Thurston: No, there's like a ton of space, right, or there's actual space between Democrats and Republicans. If you move up the the chart or up the figure.
Chloe Thurston: And this gets you know tonight and 73 1974 there was actually some overlap right there were actually conservative Democrats and liberal Republicans. And so over time the parties have sorted
Chloe Thurston: It theologically so that Democrats are, you know, liberal in terms of their voting. This is all based on voting records in Congress.
Chloe Thurston: And Republicans are conservative in terms of their voting. Again, it's something we take for granted now, but it was not sort of the case.
Chloe Thurston: You know, even sort of in somewhat recent history that the party is where as polarized and that ideology liberal or conservative ideology actually mapped you know perfectly on to voting.
Chloe Thurston: On to partisanship. So it's an extremely important change over time. And it's one that really has happened. It's not just, sort of, you know, a hunch, like we can we can show this. And so parties are more internally cohesive, that means they have contrasting agendas and contrasting worldviews
Chloe Thurston: But also, you know, because they're more cohesive, they can also be more disciplined and oppositional and so
Chloe Thurston: You know, this has sort of pros and cons. Right. The system can offer voters genuinely meaningful programmatic choices.
Chloe Thurston: But it also means because of you know this is on top of a system of separation of powers across institutions.
Chloe Thurston: This also guarantees frequent gridlock and occasional crises and also might sort of
Chloe Thurston: You know, be one of the reasons for sort of lower trust in government institutions, as we've talked about before in the class.
Chloe Thurston: So the other thing that I want to point out, it's not just sort of parties, you know, as collections of elected officials are candidates that are becoming more polarized over time.
Chloe Thurston: But also voters themselves. And so when we talk about voters. We don't say we think about partisanship instead of parties. It's sort of like
Chloe Thurston: What team people sort of aligning themselves with partisanship does seem to be very strong among voters as well and getting stronger, although not nearly as pronounced as with parties.
Chloe Thurston: But there's compelling evidence that those who identify as Republicans and those who identify as democrats are further apart from each other than ever.
Chloe Thurston: At least to some of these charts show. And again, kind of like with the parties, but not as as extreme democrats are increasingly liberal and Republicans are increasingly conservative
Chloe Thurston: They're beyond that you could wonder about independence. So there's a lot of evidence that suggests that those who claim to be independence, but who lean in one direction.
Chloe Thurston: Now most frequently actually just vote for that party whose direction they lean in men. So even sort of
Chloe Thurston: Independence tend to actually be participants who don't necessarily consider themselves artists, even though if you
Chloe Thurston: Track their voting behavior over time they vote in person ways okay so party polarization, you know, is this a problem is as bad as this good
Chloe Thurston: Um, you know, there's a big question about, you know, so one thing that party polarization allows for is it allows parties to offer distinctive agendas and you know in the past partisan differences in Congress were blurred by factions within each party.
Chloe Thurston: And today you know those differences within parties have almost disappear.
Chloe Thurston: So they've remained. But again, the party members are much less diverse in their views and the strongest divisions. Now, or between the two parties.
Chloe Thurston: As I mentioned before, you know, by 2010 or by by 20 11am every single Republican in the Senate was to the right in terms of their voting records of even the most conservative Democrat, send it
Chloe Thurston: And so, you know, this is the first time that ideological conflict in the chambers is broken down perfectly across partisan lines.
Chloe Thurston: So again, you know, Is this good or bad. It does mean that parties can offer distinctive agendas and yet there are varied perspectives on whether this is good.
Chloe Thurston: If you go back to 1944 FDR, you know, said we ought to have reel to reel parties fun liberal and conservative was a provocative claim at the time, especially because he actually had very many
Chloe Thurston: Good conservative conservative Democrats and his own party cool event. So it was seen as sort of maybe suggesting that they shouldn't be there. So, you know, this was controversial statement. And again, this was a time where
Chloe Thurston: There was much more sort of overlap ideological ideologically between the parties.
Chloe Thurston: 1959 Richard Nixon, who has been the vice president took the opposite tack as
Chloe Thurston: Franklin Roosevelt. He said it would be a great tragedy if we had only
Chloe Thurston: Are two major political parties divided on what we would call a conservative liberal line because one of the attributes of our political system is that we have avoided generally violent swings and administration from one extreme to another.
Chloe Thurston: The reason we have avoided that in both parties is that there's been room for a broad spectrum of opinion.
Chloe Thurston: So,
Chloe Thurston: This was sort of you know this was an important discussion over this period in the 1940s, 1950s. Again, there was a sense, including by the American political associate Science Association.
Chloe Thurston: In 1950 who hired effects night or have you read for last week to sort of think about whether this was a good thing or bad thing, you know.
Chloe Thurston: Is Roosevelt right or is Nixon. Right, sure there'll be sort of more distinctions between the parties than there is a time or should there be, you know, fewer distinctions that would maybe make
Chloe Thurston: That would allow you to sort of avoid these swings and administrations, which also sort of raise the stakes of different elections.
Chloe Thurston: And so the American Political Science Association in 1950 issued its own report, and it was taken pretty seriously by both political parties.
Chloe Thurston: And they argued that actually parties should become more polarized that there was not enough real ideological division in the American electorate.
Chloe Thurston: And and among American parties and this was actually a bad thing. The American Political Science Association. So I belong to this association is a professional organization, um,
Chloe Thurston: You know, they work you that you actually need ideology and conflict over ideology in order to make government more responsible and accountable and so it decried the bipartisan era that can 15th and actually called for more polarization
Chloe Thurston: And so you know what's interesting is they got they wanted. And now there are all these questions about, you know, whether or not that was actually
Chloe Thurston: A good fit or whether it's went to too far. And so this has led to these these arguments in straight lines arguments about parties and collective responsibility. The idea that
Chloe Thurston: More ideologically polarized parties would be more responsible and then would present pure alternatives to voters and so this
Chloe Thurston: These ideas are sort of echoed in the debates, I had you read for today by few arena and Ray.
Chloe Thurston: So fear ARENA WAS WORRIED. In the early 1980s that the erosion. The party activities and the electorate and government and as organizations was detrimental to democracy.
Chloe Thurston: Again he reiterated many of the same much of the same logic that was used by political scientists and then I can 50s to endorse more more polarization
Chloe Thurston: According to fear Rena it was important to be able to assign responsibility and hold people accountable. This is essential for democracy to work.
Chloe Thurston: The US, you know, has this very fragmented institutional structure with power dispersed across multiple layers of government and even within the federal government.
Chloe Thurston: You know power separated and shared. So by its nature, it's already really difficult to hold to assign blame or to punish individual politicians for collective outcomes, that's very different than
Chloe Thurston: In a institutional setup that doesn't have such separation of powers and so for Fiorina parties are really important here.
Chloe Thurston: Parties articulate electricals and ideologies and then they try to advance those goals if they're cohesive in their demands.
Chloe Thurston: That it makes it possible for voters to hold them collectively responsible
Chloe Thurston: And so that, in that sense, voters aren't actually even voting for a particular candidate or just voting for a full legislative program.
Chloe Thurston: That's articulated by the party and agreed to by its numbers. And so, you know, he says, this has been very important because it gives individual officeholders and incentive to vote with the
Chloe Thurston: Party and also to do the best that they can to carry up the agenda that the party ran for office on
Chloe Thurston: And so here arena says that, you know, in short, is arguing and this piece that you read for today that parties play a terrifying role in politics and so should be strong.
Chloe Thurston: Again they allow citizen in the clarify policy alternatives. They let citizens know who to hold accountable and they can enhance participation as well.
Chloe Thurston: So, um, and partners are actually more, you know, cohesive now than in furious time or mine. Remember, he was writing this 1980s.
Chloe Thurston: At the same time, you know, so they're more cohesive, they're more polarized than ever. They have developed in the ways that Purina wanted and the way is that the American Political Science Association wanted
Chloe Thurston: They're more focused on policy, they're more determined to implement their legislative agendas and more active in elections parties in Congress or more unified as you saw those figures.
Chloe Thurston: And party leadership in terms of national Committee's are more involved in recruiting candidates and helping them fundraising an advertisement.
Chloe Thurston: Purpose and chips. Also on the rise of voters as you saw, so you know, those are all the things that P arena wanted and, you know, but this actually make parties responsible and the way that for your Arena hopes.
Chloe Thurston: The other essay that I had you read for today by Ray suggests, maybe not re argued that partisanship is actually made it
Chloe Thurston: That parties have not become more responsible that partisanship has made it hard to generate compromise. It hasn't reduced the pot problem of particular list interests contemporary party organizations today are still sort of either their
Chloe Thurston: Groups of interests are basically interest groups with intense policy preferences voters are very dissatisfied with those options.
Chloe Thurston: They're dissatisfied with congressional gridlock and in part because the party system itself. Though in theory could make it possible, instead of you know better to hold
Chloe Thurston: Elected officials accountable for their policy program. So they run on it still super imposed on to a constitutional system of separation of powers which didn't foresee parties. So has no mechanisms for overcoming
Chloe Thurston: So it's an important debate in part because again you know parties are actually more polarized now than in fear arenas time and sort of achieved what
Chloe Thurston: Political scientists had wanted them to in the 1950s, but now that polarization is also a source of gridlock and also a source of just public dissatisfaction.
Chloe Thurston: Again, there's also a public dissatisfaction sort of the options with many people wanting a third party, even though it's not something that's really very pliable in the US.
Chloe Thurston: In the US context so
Chloe Thurston: I wanted to say, sort of, you know, where are we today when we make a Brooks's column.
Chloe Thurston: Also today. So today, you know, like I mentioned earlier, they're sort of debates about whether you know there's a seventh party system. Are we still in the sixth
Chloe Thurston: But there are a few things to note. So, one is that though partisanship is very strong, the parties are very polarized in certain ways.
Chloe Thurston: Parties are sort of less able to control candidates themselves.
Chloe Thurston: And so candidates can run by running against Washington by running against the establishment, even though they're still a member of a party because
Chloe Thurston: It's in their interest to be the member of a party in order to get elected candidates can also break with party or orthodoxy, although we don't actually we see this in
Chloe Thurston: Elections, but we don't necessarily see this so much and how they vote when in office.
Chloe Thurston: And as I mentioned parties are having difficulty controlling candidates, the political scientists Julia has already sort of
Chloe Thurston: describes this period that we're in right now as one of sort of weak parties but strong partisanship so
Chloe Thurston: While partisanship is strong and while people are polarized voting in congress tends to be pretty polarized parties themselves are finding themselves with increasing difficulty and actually organizing and controlling candidates.
Chloe Thurston: Shifting communications technology like Twitter is also a big contributor to this in the sense that individual candidates don't necessarily have to go through a party.
Chloe Thurston: You know, they don't have to necessarily have full access to like the party to get their own voice out and to generate a platform.
Chloe Thurston: At the same time, there are some reasons for skepticism, you know, are we in like a totally new system right now. We don't know yet. We're in sort of you know what, maybe we'll know in a few weeks, but we probably won't know for a few years, but to think about 2016
Chloe Thurston: Which looked like a you know a really substantial change in terms of of the American Party System. Actually, the change from the electoral map was pretty modest
Chloe Thurston: In terms of the 2016 Trump versus Clinton election. It didn't look that different from sort of previous electoral cycles.
Chloe Thurston: And participate in traditional partisan divisions persisted on a range of issues. So it's still in some ways too soon to tell
Chloe Thurston: And you know if the parties do change and parties to change over time. It's still a bit too soon to tell sort of what Phil will come to represent so I'll end where we started. And that's with David Brooks this you know idea of end of the two party system.
Chloe Thurston: And, you know, the sort of answer. And both of those things. This dimensions that he identified both the sort of
Chloe Thurston: menu of policy choices that people would be motivated to vote on but also the number of parties are, you know, right now, there's not a lot of evidence that either of those things are
Chloe Thurston: Are sort of happening. This was in 2013 and so we're two years later, and this prediction is not yet in the cards.
Chloe Thurston: But could change at some point. So I'll leave you with that and on Thursday we'll talk about campaigns and elections just perfect, because it's election Eve yet. So, have a great day.
Owen Elton (he/him): Thank you.
Gabrielle Alava: Thank
You